[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You're responsible
parents, right?
At home, you keep
hazardous products out
of the reach of the kids--
detergents, washing
powder, cleaning products.
But there is a chemical threat
that you can't fight against.
Pollutants that you can't
see and that you can't smell
but to which our children
are very exposed.
Dangerous particles that
are hidden in our food
and in the water that we drink.
Outside, our children inhale
other chemical products--
a staggering statistic.
Every day, children can
be exposed to around 130
chemical pollutants.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> In the great toxic game--
>> --will children always
be on the losing side?
Their brains and their
bodies are developing.
They are the most
vulnerable when
it comes to chemical products.
Cancers, birth abnormalities,
hormonal problems,
mental impairments,
and even autism--
these very different
pathologies could often
be caused by the same thing.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Across the world, doctors
and scientists are sounding
the alarm.
>> It's a chemical that has
a lot of negative effects.
It has potential to be
very harmful to children.
>> Our population here probably
have much higher incidence,
about 10 times of
the national rate.
>> Children should not be
forced to give away some
of their brain functions just
because we enjoy some benefits
from using pesticides.
>> Pesticides-- the
number one suspect.
In the great toxic
game, our children
always land on this square.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> We have taken samples of
and analyzed the hair of 20
or so of these children
across the world.
Frankly, we were
stunned by the results.
On average, these children
had 40 different pesticides
present in their hair.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> The great toxic game has
led us to six multinationals--
Syngenta, Bayer, Monsanto,
Dow, BASF, and DuPont.
We call them the big six.
They reign almost absolute
over a colossal market
that is worth 50 billion euros.
We have tracked their compounds.
Some of these
dangerous compounds
have intruded into our
everyday environment.
We will show you how children
breathe in a pesticide
from the air every
day that is classified
as a likely carcinogen.
Its name is Folpet.
It is one of the best sellers
of the German giant buyer.
[APPLAUSE]
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> This is Nathan.
>> Hey, Nathan.
Nice to meet you.
>> This is Martin.
>> We have also discovered
that some pesticides could play
a significant role
in triggering autism,
and autism itself is exploding
amongst children throughout
the world.
Our investigation has
led us as far as Hawaii.
This paradise on earth has
become an open air laboratory.
It's the preferred playground
of the agrochemical
multinationals.
In these fields, the firms
test out their future products.
To put an end to the
massive usage of pesticides,
the inhabitants have voted.
But the manufacturers have
counterattacked in the courts.
>> What do you think of the fact
that a democratic process being
challenged by big companies
like the one you represent, Dow,
[INAUDIBLE] or even Monsanto?
What do you think?
>> As I mentioned in court and
as I think the question is,
do the voters have the right
to regulate in this area?
We believe that they do.
>> So let's reveal to you how
some chemical products from
the multinationals put
our children in danger.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One year ago, our investigation
began with a number--
number 97.
According to the EFSA,
the European Food
and Safety Authority,
97% of food products
contain residues of pesticides.
It's impossible to avoid them.
But in any case, why would
we want to avoid them?
According to the industry,
they kill insects,
they get rid of weeds,
so they protect crops.
They are a miracle solution.
According to Syngenta, they're
even good for the ground
that our children play on.
And for Monsanto, they ensure
a good meal for our babies.
And if you listen
to Dow, they quite
simply mean the end
of World hunger--
a miracle solution.
And did you know that
France is the promised
land of pesticides?
It's the biggest consumer
of these products in Europe
and number three in the world.
But exactly what
products are they,
and in what quantities
are they used?
After many long months
of investigation,
we have been able to get a hold
of secret government figures
on the usage of
pesticides in France.
Over 800,000 lines-- an
inventory of pesticide sales
product by product, category
by category, and year by year.
If we had to print it all, we
would need more than 10 studios
like this one.
Our first finding-- in France,
on average nearly 65,000
tons of pure pesticides
are sold each year.
In the top 10 of the
best selling products,
names that smell
sweetly of nature,
glyphosate, Mancozeb, Folpet.
Further down are
tetraconazole, fenoxycarb,
and then some rather strange
classifications, T, T-plus,
CMR--
pesticides that are
classified as carcinogenic,
toxic to reproduction, hormone
disruptive, or neurotoxic.
To better understand the
impact of these products
on people and in particular on
children, the best thing to do
is to go to the places where
they are most widely used.
One department keeps coming up.
With over 2,700 tons of
pesticide sold there each year,
it's one of the
biggest consumers--
the Gironde.
Ah, the Gironde-- the
region of good wine,
Bordeaux wine, the symbol
of French excellence.
Vineyards stretch as
far as the eye can see--
nature in its purest form.
Well, kind of.
[RECORD SCRATCHES]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
That day, we have
only just arrived
amongst the Medoc vines.
The odor of chemical products
irritates the throat.
These big machines are
responsible-- pesticide
sprayers.
They go over the field up to 18
times per plot and per season.
We want to know what's
being sprayed today.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> We try our luck at one
of the neighboring plots.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> And then as we get
in the car again--
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> --it feels more like we're in
a nuclear zone than the Parker
Guide of French Wines--
full body protective
clothing, sealed gloves,
and breathing masks.
To clean a crop sprayer,
the farm workers
take great precautions.
It has to be said that the
danger seems very real.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As is also illustrated by this
map of the Gironde prefecture,
it is a map of sensitive
sites, including
elementary and high schools
that are located close
to crop spraying sites.
132 establishments are affected.
Like this school, a few
meters away from the yard
are vines as far
as the eye can see.
The building, with 100 or so
children inside, is surrounded.
To measure the exposure of the
children from these schools,
we suggest a little
experiment to their parents.
We will need some gloves
and a pair of scissors.
At the exits of those
establishments located
close to the vineyards,
we take a lock of hair
from the children.
In total, we take hair
samples of 20 children
from four elementary
schools which
are classed as sensitive
due to the crop
spraying that is carried out.
Then we send the samples
to a public laboratory
in Luxembourg, to the European
specialists in the analysis
of pollutants found in hair.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We get the results back.
On average, these children
have 44 pesticides
in their hair, of which
24 are categorized
in these red columns.
Pesticides that are
banned, but which are still
present in the environment
or authorized pesticides that
are classed as dangerous,
carcinogenic compounds,
toxic to reproduction,
neurotoxic, mutagenic,
hormone disruptive.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> In France, since 1980
childhood cancers have been
increasing at a rate
of 1% every year--
2,500 new cases each year.
It's the second highest
cause of infant mortality.
In the Gironde, according
to the National Register
of Childhood Leukemia, a child's
risk of developing a leukemia
is 20% higher than
the national average.
Is there a link between
these illnesses and exposure
to pesticides?
For French scientists, there
is not a shadow of a doubt.
In 2013, Inserm, the French
Institute of Health and Medical
Research, published
an appraisal report
on all of the scientific
studies carried out
on the impact of pesticides
on health for the first time.
In the long list of illnesses
linked to pesticides,
two catch our attention-- two
childhood cancers, brain tumors
and leukemia, in children.
So inevitably we
ask the question,
who is responsible for this
heavy reliance on pesticides?
The farmers?
They themselves breathe in
the products that they spray.
They are victims too.
We prefer to investigate
those who are really
the ones profiting
from this, those
who sell these dangerous
pesticides, the agrochemical
multinationals.
Amongst the most
widely used products
in France, the name of one
compound keeps cropping up,
Folpet.
It's classified as a likely
carcinogen in the United States
and as a suspected
carcinogen in Europe.
It is sold worldwide.
And there is one multinational
that is way out in front
when it comes to sales of
products made from Folpet--
Bayer.
Bayer-- you've heard
of them, right?
The chemical giant, the
inventor of aspirin.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Over time, the company has
diversified its activities.
It produces medical
equipment, plastic goods.
It takes care of
animals, and above all it
develops pesticides.
Folpet is one of
Bayer's best sellers.
The stakes are pretty
high, if you imagine.
In terms of weight,
the amount of Folpet
sold each year in France is
the equivalent of nearly 5
billion aspirin tablets.
But if we take a
closer look, Folpet
can be found virtually
everywhere in France, even
in the air that we breathe.
In 2015, the bodies responsible
for measuring pesticides
in the air found Folpet in
over 15 of France's 22 regions.
There is no danger of Bayer
getting a slap on the wrist
either, as there are
no regulations that
exist regarding the
concentration of pesticides
in the air.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
However, we still have
a fair few questions
to ask the German
company, but we find it
hard to get in touch with them.
No one at Bayer seems to
be available to answer
our questions, so we
need to play smart.
And we've decided to go
to the annual shareholders
meeting that takes place
in Cologne, Germany.
It's forbidden to ask questions
if you're not a shareholder.
So we've bought some
shares, and we've
got dressed up for the occasion.
Now we just have to get
the cameras through.
Mission complete.
Despite the metal
detectors and security men,
we managed to get
inside the building.
The meeting begins.
We split up so as not
to raise suspicion.
Marijn Dekkers, the MD of Bayer,
opens the general meeting.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> With 11% growth and a
turnover of 9.5 billion euros,
the pesticides and seed sector
of Bayer is this year's big
winner by far.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Well, that all sounds great.
[APPLAUSE]
We are still not allowed
to film the meeting,
so we've had to get out
our trusty old camcorders.
The questions follow
one after another,
and we patiently await our turn.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We've brought along an
empty bag of Bayer's Folpet
for the occasion, which is
marked under the brand name
Mikal Flash.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Six hours after
the meeting began,
the room has emptied somewhat.
And it's finally our
turn to ask our question
about Folpet, the flagship
pesticide sold by Bayer.
>> Hi.
My name is Elise Lucet.
I'm coming from France, and
I'm a shareholder of Bayer.
I'd like to know if
I can ask a question
in French or in English please?
>> I'm sorry to interrupt you,
but I just told the audience
that they have to talk here at
the German shareholders meeting
in German here, and you have
to ask your question in German
or please make use
of a translator.
>> I have my translator, so
you will hear me in German.
Wait a minute, please.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Well, we had
seen that coming.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Thank you.
Merci.
>> It's true that our question
was a bit long winded.
However, the answer
would be rather concise.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Bayer, science
for a better life.
>> Science for a better life--
is that so?
Today, according to our
calculations each year
in France, Bayer
sells 5,600 tons
of pesticides classed as likely
carcinogens, toxic to unborn
fetuses or hormone disruptors.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Is Bayer going to stop
selling these toxic compounds?
Three months after our
request for an interview,
the company remains silent--
not a single email, telephone
call, not even a letter.
We are getting impatient.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Ah, but wait-- the brand
is holding a conference
at a luxury hotel in Paris.
The event draws to a close,
and we slip into the conference
room to meet the Global Director
of Bayer Pesticides and Seeds
Division, Liam Condon.
>> Mr. Condon?
Hi.
>> Hey.
>> How are you?
>> I'm Martin.
I'm a French reporter working
for the French National TV.
>> Yeah.
>> We're trying to get in touch
with you and Bayer about this
list.
It's the 50 product list
sold by Bayer in France
which are known to be
carcinogenic or neurotoxic
or even toxic for the fetus.
And so I just wanted to
have your point of view
about this product because
they're really dangerous,
especially for children.
So I want to know what
you thought about that?
50 products, [INAUDIBLE].
>> Every product depends
on how it's used.
I mean, alcohol can
be very dangerous
depending on the dose.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> You're a responsible company.
Bayer could say,
for instance, well,
let's try to avoid
selling products
that we know are carcinogenic,
mutagenic, neurotoxic,
or toxic for the fetus.
You could say that.
You could stand for it.
Why not?
>> Well, what is the point
if there's no real risk?
And we've got to look at
what's the problem that we
are trying to solve.
And if you're using a dose that
doesn't have a carcinogenic
risk, then there
shouldn't be an issue.
>> OK, so if these
products, for instance,
are being withdrawn from
the markets until the last
of the year, what will you say?
What will you say
about these products?
Would you say that they
were finally dangerous?
>> Well--
>> I mean, are they?
>> --I don't know what the
reason would be for them to be
withdrawn.
But, I mean--
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Merci, Mr. Condon.
Thank you, merci.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Why would these products
be withdrawn, Mr. Condon?
Maybe due to their toxicity.
In France, since 1987
680 of Bayer's pesticides
have been banned
from the market,
notably because of
their hazardousness.
In the rankings of
withdrawn products,
Bayer is by far the winner,
way ahead of its competitors.
They really are the champions.
[CLAPPING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And now, listen closely.
What we discovered a few
months after our investigation
began alarmed us.
Some pesticides could
play a significant role
in triggering autism,
and autism itself
is exploding amongst
children across the world--
two worrying pieces
of information
in quick succession.
It's a lot to take on board.
So let's look at
things step by step.
Is it true that the number
of autistic children
is increasing?
One man might have the answer
to our question, Florent Chapel.
He is the voice of Collective
Autisme, which brings together
over 400,000 families.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> But first and foremost,
he is the father of Galaad,
who was diagnosed as severely
autistic at just three years
old.
Florent Chapel
fights for his son
to be able to have the normal
life of a 10-year-old boy.
This morning, they are preparing
this week's timetable together.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Galaad goes to elementary
school accompanied
by an educational assistant.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Florent Chapel has
investigated the evolution
of the number of cases of
child autism in the world.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> We found it hard to
believe these figures,
but they are real.
In the United States,
they are seeing
an explosive growth in autism.
The highly official CDC, the
Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, is blunt.
1 in every 68 children is
affected by an autism spectrum
disorder.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> And how can this upward trend
in other Western countries be
explained?
By better methods of diagnosis?
Of course, but not that alone.
That very day in
Brussels, we would
uncover another explanation.
The increase in autism
amongst children
could also be linked to our
chemical environment and one
insecticide in particular.
The Endocrine Society,
an organization
that unites 17,000 scientists
from across the world,
is presenting the findings
of its latest study.
It is a unique event that is
broadcast to the United States
and Europe.
The researchers
are today warning
about the effect of chemical
pollutants on children's brains
and of autism in particular.
>> So we produced a study that
demonstrates that two chemicals
produce autistic-like behaviors
in an animal model of autism.
These are extremely
important implications.
>> We have all of the mothers
behind us when we say we must
protect the next
generation's brains.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Chemical products are
responsible for autism?
Before he leaves to
return to Harvard,
we corner this research
scientist to find out more.
>> Right now, we have a total of
12 chemicals on the list where
we are convinced that those
chemicals actually harm
children in regard to
their brain development.
We have also added some
pesticides like chlorpyrifos.
[TAPE REWINDING]
>> Chlorpyri--what?
>> Chlorpyrifos.
>> Chlorpyrifos is an
insecticide that is widely used
particularly in
the United States.
To understand the effects
of this chemical product
on autism, we must
head to California.
In this state, by
law farmers have
to declare what pesticides they
spray per square kilometer,
which gives this map that
the public have access to.
The red areas are those
where pesticide usage is
the most highly concentrated.
So why don't we pay a
visit to these places
where the chlorpyrifos is
used the most, like here
into Tulare county?
Orange and lemon trees jostle
each other over the horizon.
The region is the country's
second largest citrus fruit
producer.
To maintain its
position, they don't
skimp on chlorpyrifos, the
neurotoxic that kills insects.
95 tons of pure substance
are applied each year.
The inhabitants, mainly
Mexican immigrants,
live right next to
the plantations.
And according to them,
it's the children
who are paying the price.
Over 10 years here,
there has been
a six-fold increase in the
number of children with autism.
Claudia Angulo and
her children are
one of the families
affected by this phenomenon.
Her son Isaac has been
diagnosed as mildly autistic.
Isaac's apparent calm is
down to his medications that
regulate his hyperactivity.
If he doesn't take them, the
little boy changes drastically.
>> I get mad really easily.
>> Really?
And--
>> Like if they'll say something
about me, I just get mad.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> You seeing him like this
was some kind of crisis?
>> That he's hyper 'cause
he's all running around crazy.
>> Claudia Angulo is
convinced that chlorpyrifos is
responsible for
her son's autism.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> And what role does
chlorpyrifos have in his
pathology?
We take a sample of
Isaac's hair for analysis.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The results are conclusive--
31.94 picograms of chlorpyrifos,
well above the detection
limits.
But it's impossible to
make the formal link
between the compound
and his autism.
However, a few kilometers away,
one mother of an autistic child
has the evidence
in her possession.
>> Nice to meet you.
>> Hi.
>> This is Nathan.
>> Hey, Nathan.
Nice to meet you.
>> This is Martin.
>> Nathan is severely autistic,
which is the highest degree
of the pathology.
As far as his mother
knows, it's the first case
of autism within
the Sancos family.
>> It's like Monterey.
There's a-- but a lot of
grapes do come out of here.
>> They live right in the middle
of the area where chlorpyrifos
is applied.
>> There it is.
This could be the reason why.
My child was in utero
and was probably--
you know, I probably
ingested or, like, inhaled
some of this stuff.
And you know, it's
not personal use.
It's not his choice.
Certainly not my choice either.
So I don't think he will ever
be able to live independently.
And he's so sweet, you know?
And he's just-- it's just not--
>> He's just a kid.
>> Yeah, yeah.
So anyway-- [SIGHS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> To find the
causes of his autism,
Renee is making her
son participate in one
of the world's largest
studies on the subject.
1,000 autistic
children are being
monitored across California.
The prestigious UC
Davis University
is piloting this research.
Irva Hertz-Picciotto is an
environmental epidemiologist.
>> Yeah, so all
of this is autism.
>> For 15 years, she
has been compiling all
of the neurological
tests, blood analysis,
and urine samples of
these 1,000 children.
Recently, she has
superimposed the map
of the neurotoxic
pesticide spray zones
with the addresses of the
autistic children's mothers
when they were pregnant.
Her conclusions confirm
the family's suspicions.
>> We found that the cases were
much more likely to have lived
within a buffer of somewhere
between one in a quarter and 1
and three-quarters miles--
so a little bit more
than 2 kilometers
from these applications.
And it was-- specifically
for chlorpyrifos,
it actually had the
highest elevation in risk.
So somewhere closer
to threefold more
likely to have been
used near the homes
when the child was a fetus.
>> The chlorpyrifos industry
wants to hide this truth at all
costs.
>> Could you type in
"chlorpyrifos info" and click?
>> The first site that comes up
is this one, chlorpyrifos.com.
>> I'll let you read this.
>> The weight of the evidence
continues to demonstrate no
link between
chlorpyrifos and autism,
and no data exists to
substantiate such a claim.
OK, well, who has--
>> You know who it is?
>> Oh, yes.
It's Dow, Dow Agro
Sciences, of course.
>> Dow Agro Sciences, the
world's leading producer
of chlorpyrifos.
>> It's an interesting thing.
The tobacco industry
was very organized
in attacking the health
studies for decades,
and they lied about
all kinds of things.
I think that's what large
corporations tend to do.
They're protecting
their profits,
they're protecting their
investors, their shareholders,
and the health of people is not
the first thing on their mind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It has to be said that Dow
already has a solid reputation
in the field.
Dow-- it is still a relatively
unknown name and yet
is the second
largest manufacturer
of chemical products
in the world.
During the war in
Vietnam, Dow was
one of the suppliers of
the infamous Agent Orange.
It is a highly toxic
weed killer which
was sprayed in
massive quantities
over the Vietnamese
forests, and it
was responsible for
many illnesses and birth
deformities.
Dow was also developing
its flagship insecticide
at the same time, chlorpyrifos,
but this compound also
sits in the accused dock.
>> Dow agricultural chemists
have the answer to kill them
inexpensively without Harm
to the crops they infest
or to the soil.
>> In 1995, the US Environmental
Protection Agency published
an investigation into hundreds
of cases of accidental
chlorpyrifos poisoning.
The pesticide was eventually
banned from domestic use
in the United States.
In Europe, too, chlorpyrifos is
banned from sale to the public,
but it is still widely
used in agriculture.
We've been trying to
contact Dow for six months--
no answer.
We even went to try to
find them at their testing
facility in California.
No one wanted to
open the door to us.
So we tried our luck at
their American factory
which produces the pesticides.
Once again, we fell
flat on our faces.
No one from Dow wanted
to answer our questions
on the toxic effects of
chlorpyrifos such as autism.
Several months later, Dow
finally sent us this email.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Did you notice, in
its email, Dow never
provided the findings
of these 4,000 studies?
For our interview,
the multinational
directs us to the European
Pesticide Lobby in Brussels.
It is here at the ECPA, European
Crop Protection Association.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Smile, you're on camera.
With this little camera, the
ECPA's communication team
will also record the interview.
Let's start off with
the results of the hair
analysis of the
children that we've met
throughout our investigation.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> So you're beginning to
understand how this lobby
works.
While independent
scientists find
that pesticides have
negative effects on health,
the manufacturers throw
doubt on any studies
that might challenge them.
And never mind that hundreds
of scientific researchers
across the world have arrived
at the same conclusions.
In any case, the French
and American governments
are due to decide
this year whether they
should ban chlorpyrifos.
But in this fight
against pesticides,
politicians and citizens don't
always have the last word.
Our investigation
takes us to Hawaii--
the paradise on earth,
the island of surfing,
wahines, and flower
neck garlands.
In reality, the power
of the chemical industry
here has completely
won out over democracy
at the children's peril.
To understand all this, we
need to take to the skies.
We fly over Kauai, the
oldest island of the Hawaii
archipelago.
The island has one
distinctive feature--
the world's biggest
agrochemical companies
have all taken up residence here
because the climate is ideal--
up to four harvests per year.
Dow, DuPont, Syngenta, BASF--
they are all here, a few
meters away from each other.
Monsanto is just opposite
on the neighboring island.
In these fields, the firms
test their future products.
They are developing
tomorrow's seeds.
It's the largest
open air laboratory
for GMOs in the world--
6,000 hectares of testing.
And to ensure that nothing
impedes these trials,
these companies use huge
quantities of pesticides.
The sprayers are everywhere.
>> I was wondering what kind of
pesticide is being used today?
>> You know what?
You are on private
property right now.
You're not supposed to be here.
Go over there.
>> All right, thanks.
>> It was worth a try.
The workers here have
their lips tightly sealed,
but documents talk, like this
one we have got our hands on--
an internal document
from DuPont,
one of the giants of
chemical products.
In it, we find the number
of chemical applications
carried out by the
multinational--
in total, over 2,500 per
year, which makes 7 per day
on average, much higher than
the rest of the country.
And that's just DuPont alone.
The inhabitants-- in
particular, the children--
suffer the consequences of this
massive usage of pesticides.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
These clouds of red
dust are at issue.
They are full of
pesticides and swirl about
according to the wind
traveling from fields
all the way to homes.
Doctors on the island
have rung the alarm bells.
50 of them have signed an
appeal on the worrying number
of birth deformities like Dr.
Chatkupt, an obstetrician.
>> It's really nice of
you for having us here.
How long have you
been working here?
>> 11 years, since 2004.
I used to work in much
bigger hospital before.
Let's say, about 10 or 15 times
the delivery of this hospital.
I think it's that it
looks like it was higher
than what my experience was.
Our population here probably
have much higher incidence,
about 10 times of
the national rate.
>> Are you worried about
this chemical exposure?
>> I do.
I think we should have
somebody to really look
into all these numbers--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> --so we can find--
something unusual happen.
That's what I'm trying to say.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the birth defects
that is the most commonly found
on the island is gastroschisis.
These Hawaiian babies are
born with their intestines
outside their stomachs,
requiring a high risk
surgical procedure that can't
be carried out on the island.
A deformity that is
supposed to be very rare--
not here.
There have been four cases
in the past two years.
[CHANTING]
>> Faced with these
worrying phenomena,
the island's people
are taking action.
The inhabitants have
swapped their surfboards
for placards against this
industry experimentation.
They are calling for
a law that obliges
the companies to disclose the
names of the pesticides used
and the quantities
they are used in.
And above all, the citizens
are demanding the creation
of buffer zones between these
testing fields and schools
or hospitals--
nothing revolutionary.
At the head of this
movement is this gentleman,
a county councilman.
It is he who put the draft bill
before the island's council.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is the council chambers.
This is where all the
official hearings are held.
This is where-- Bill
2491 was held here.
>> At that time, in front
of him, in this very room,
hundreds of witnesses went into
the stand, one after the other,
to persuade the counselors
to pass the law.
Nurses--
>> More babies born with missing
ear canals, malformed ears,
recurring nose bleeds, cleft
palates, asthma, allergies,
rashes, hormonal imbalances,
more frequent miscarriages
>> Hi.
>> And then there were parents.
>> My name is Randy
Lee Dickinson.
I live in Waimea Valley,
right below the foothills
of the pioneer cliff right
across the street, right
by the river.
I'm here on behalf of
myself and my family.
And I want to speak
about my child, who
was born with a
neurological brain defect.
>> My son has a condition
called gastroschisis.
Basically, the stomach's
on the outside.
[SOBS] I just--
I don't blame
anybody, but I just
want to stop the poisoning.
I'm just asking somebody.
Something's wrong here.
>> And then amongst the
witnesses was this gentleman
in the blue polo shirt.
He represents the
island's pesticides lobby.
>> I mean, the fundamental
difference is between it being
law or voluntary.
Because what happens
in here-- if it's law,
it has ramifications
much wider than just
Kauai that our companies
are interested in as well.
>> What kind of
ramifications are those?
>> Of being adopted in
other counties and states.
>> So you're concerned that
other counties would also want
to protect their schools?
>> They were concerned that
other communities and states
might want to do the same thing.
They don't want to
set a precedent,
and that really is the
foundation of this whole thing.
Their argument, their
push-back, the reason
they are pushing
so hard on this is
they don't want us
to set an example.
>> This local vote
became a global issue.
So during months,
Monsanto or Dow Chemical
did everything they
could to convince
the people of Maui
and Kauai to vote
no with terrifying advertising.
>> Regardless of what you think
of GMOs in the seed companies,
vote no because the initiative
would shut down farms and would
put hundreds of
people out of work.
>> The question you have to ask
yourself is before you vote,
tell your wife
you lost your job.
Tell your kids, we cannot take
you to the doctor because we
need more insurance.
>> If the initiative
were to pass,
there will be enormous financial
implications for the county
of Maui.
>> The pesticide industry
put all its weight behind
the fight, spending nearly $8
million on these advertising
campaigns.
>> Vote no on the initiative.
>> In the opposing camp,
the people spent $82,807.21.
It didn't matter.
>> We passed the bill!
>> After months
of confrontation,
the law was finally passed.
>> Harry!
Harry!
>> But while Hawaii slept, the
pesticide lobby was already
formulating its counterattack.
A few weeks after this
historic moment, Syngenta,
Dow, DuPont, and
BASF filed charges
against the island of Kauai.
Monsanto did the same with the
neighboring island of Maui.
These chemical giants
contested that the councils
didn't have the right to
pass such laws and on what
grounds exactly.
It would be better to go
and ask them in person.
At DuPont, nobody wanted
to see us, nor at BASF.
At Dow, they were not
allowed to talk to the press.
>> (DISTORTED) Yeah, by the
time we got from the apartment
to the interview--
>> In front of Monsanto, when
we showed our press badge,
security cars
immediately turned up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It was only Syngenta
that would give us
a few minutes of its time--
off camera.
One of the site's
managers received us,
but he did not
want to be filmed.
We spoke to him in front of a
lovely picture of a Syngenta
flower.
>> One of the
questions we have--
>> Hawaii's heat was starting
to make us hallucinate.
Listen to what he had to say.
It's worth its
weight in sunflowers.
>> --why did you
guys decide to sue?
>> The concern is that if you
have to state everything about
exactly where you're
doing exactly what,
then they would make it more
likely that people would go
into the field and burn it down.
>> The bill was also
about disclosure--
the type of pesticide,
the quantity of pesticide.
How was that a problem?
>> So a part of it is really the
administrative burden of having
to do that.
>> Administration burden.
>> So for us as a large company,
again, we can actually do that.
But for all of the
smaller farmers,
if they have to do that and
record everything the way
that we do, they
might actually--
I mean, we have staff.
>> You cannot stand
up for these farmers?
>> Yeah.
>> In reality, only agricultural
companies that use significant
quantities of pesticides
are affected by this law,
not the small farmers.
The appeal ruling on the
neighboring island of Maui
was due to be
given the next day.
Before going, we decided to
adopt some local customs.
We picked some flowers right
next to the test fields,
right where these agrochemical
multinationals spray thousands
of tons of pesticides.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Then we made this beautiful
flower neck garland.
And we went to the
county courthouse.
The hearing was due to
start in just a few minutes.
It's impossible to film
inside the building.
Two hours later and
against all expectations,
the judges ruled in favor
of the multinationals
and invalidated the law.
The eight lawyers from
the pesticide industry
left the courthouse.
Marjorie Bronster
led the appeal.
>> --from friends of
the French National TV.
Now for this-- it's
a lei from Maui.
Can I offer you?
>> Oh, really?
Yes, you may.
>> Yeah.
OK, how would you--
put it like this, OK.
We took the samples from
the GMO fields down in Maui.
These flowers actually
are from GMO fields.
They might be full of
pesticides still though.
I mean, I know what
you think about that.
How do you-- what do
you think of the fact
that a democratic
process being challenged
by big companies like the one
you represent, Dow, [INAUDIBLE]
or even Monsanto?
What do you think of that?
>> Well, I represent a lot
of parties in this case.
Not all of them are
large companies.
But I will tell you
that the question
that the court had
to address is who
has the authority to regulate.
The court is not
going to be addressing
the question of whether the
pesticides are good or bad.
It's really a question as
to whether the county has
the right to step in and
regulate in this area.
And our position is simply
that this is not a county area.
It is for the state or the
federal government to regulate,
and they have been
regulating this area.
>> Do you think the people from
Maui did not vote correctly?
>> Thank you.
>> I mean--
I'm sorry to insist, because
we've-- you know we traveled
a long way to come here.
So do you think the people from
Maui did not vote correctly?
What do you think?
>> As I mentioned in court and
as I think the question is,
do the voters have the right
to regulate in this area?
We believe that they do not.
>> What kind of message do you
think that sends to the people
that believe that votes
can change things?
What do you think of that?
>> Certainly, the initiative
process is appropriate
in certain areas, but we do
not believe that this is one
of them.
>> Right.
Very last question,
Miss Bronster, and I'll
leave you alone.
Do you personally believe
that the pesticides used
on Maui, on Kauai and large
islands-- some of there
are neurotoxic, some of there
are carcinogenic, some of them
are toxic for the fetus.
Do you think this is
good for a community?
Do you think for the
children it's good as well?
>> As I mentioned, that's
not what this case is about,
and I'm not going
to get into it.
Thank you.
>> As a human being, what
do you think about that?
>> Meanwhile in front
of the courthouse,
the island's inhabitants who
had supported the law were still
reeling.
>> It's like saying--
it's saying we don't count.
What it's saying is
that corporations, yeah,
have more importance in their
world than we the people
and the children, yeah?
We go through this
belief of having
the right to express
ourselves and vote,
and we have done that.
And we were victorious, and
then they holed everything up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In Hawaii, in the
great democracy game,
the chemical industry
is the winner.
As our investigation
drew to a close,
we wondered if our
children would end up
having to live like
this, protected
against their own environment.
At least there was
some good news, though.
Amongst the 50 Bayer products
classified as dangerous,
six were withdrawn
from the French market.
Chlorpyrifos, the pesticide
that is neurotoxic to children,
is due to be banned in the
United States and France
in the coming months.
In French schools located
close to application zones,
the installation of
antipesticide walls or nets
has begun around the buildings.
It's scant protection,
but maybe it
is the start of a
general awareness.
[TAPE REWINDING]
Since this
documentary has begun,
the pesticide
industry has turned
over 4,950,000 euros in sales.
In the great toxic game,
there is no doubt about it--
the winners and the losers
are always the same.
[MUSIC PLAYING]